---
title: 'What the COVID-19 pandemic reveals about us'
date: 2021-04-14
permalink: /posts/2021/04/blog-post-6/
tags:
  - miscellaneous
---


<p>
The COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally changed our lives -- and I'm confident I'm speaking for 
everyone here. From selfish toilet paper hoarding, to Asian-American racism, to inequities in
vaccine distribution, the pandemic has exposed some rather ugly qualities of American health 
care and its people. Some of these features, however, have long been known, especially the last
of the aforementioned "revelations" [1]. Where to begin?
</p>

<p>
What brough me to make this post was the comments from a friend of mine concerning the distribution
of vaccines in D.C., where he lives. He found it curious that vaccine distribution -- that is, the
percentage of individuals that were vaccinated -- was strongly correlated with wealth. Digging a little
deeper revealed this was more than a hunch, with the two wealthiest wards in terms of median 
household income boasting an average vaccinated proportion of 18.5%, while the two poorest
wards having an average of only a measly 10%. The population of the wealthiest ward in D.C. (Ward 3), at the time
of writing, is 20% vaccinated, while the ward with the lowest median household income, Ward 8, only
has 9% of its population vaccinated. This inequity underlies a racial disparity as well, as the population of Ward 8
is 92% Black/African American, according to 
<a href="https://www.dchealthmatters.org/?module=demographicdata&controller=index&action=index&id=131495&sectionId=" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">recent
demographic data</a>.
The difference is stark, and has already received 
<a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-vaccine-disparities/2021/03/25/f9661460-8126-11eb-81db-b02f0398f49a_story.html" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">media attention</a>.
</p>

<p>
This is just one piece of larger puzzle of healthcare inequities that have been brough to light
during the upheavel wrought by the pandemic. As mentioned above, these consequences almost always
fall disproportionately on minority populations. During the initial shut downs in the early months
of 2020, many small businesses and temporary positions were canceled in light of new government mandates.
From the perspective of an undergraduate student, as I was at the time, this meant canceled internships,
REUs, and temporary summer positions. I myself had a summer job in NY canceled due to the pandemic, and was
fortunate to find an online research position to make ends meet over the summer leading up to 
my first year in graduate school. Many others weren't so lucky. 
</p>

<p>
This burden was especially severe on low-wage workers. Not only were they in a more vulnerable position
than most to the economic fallout, but these professions were also less likely to 
</p>

<p>
These inequities aren't confined to municipal or even state levels, however. Looking beyond the scope
of the United States, it is easy to find examples of these disparities on the international scale. A 
recent report by CNBC states that... In a press conference held in March, blah blah see video here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFp7FUV8CB8

</p>

<h2> References </h2>

[1] Dickman, S.L., Himmelstein, D.U., & S. Woolhandler. Inequality and the health-care 
system in the USA. The Lancet. 2017; 389(10077).


[1] Bartlett, M.S. The Critical Community Size for Measles in the United States. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series A (General). 1960; 123(1).  

[2] Keeling, M.J. & B.T. Grenfell. Disease extinction and community size: modeling the 
persistence of measles. Science. 1997; 275(5296). 
