---
title: "Sexual selection"
date: 2022-08-27
permalink: /posts/2022/08/blog-post-12/
tags:
  - miscellaneous
---

<p>
This topic/post has been sitting in the back of my mind for quite a long while. I have also been itching
to post an update, so I will combine the two into one long post! 
</p>


<p>
I enjoy the outdoors and, since moving to North Carolina, I have become well acquainted with the state's feathered 
fauna. In previous posts I have already recounted the fright I had when first encountering the barred owl, but my 
morning and afternoon outings are frequented by more common species, such as titmice, wrens, cardinals, and chickadees.
Compelled by these visitors I eventually caved and picked up an Audubon bird identification manual, where I log my
sightings wherever I go! A conference in California this summer introduced me to muddy swallow nests and the
<a href="https://www.allaboutbirds.org/guide/Eurasian_Collared-Dove/sounds" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">lonely calls</a>
of the Eurasion Collared-Dove (similar in sound to their relative, the Mourning Dove), while my time in
Maine was greeted by the
<a href="https://www.allaboutbirds.org/guide/Red-eyed_Vireo/sounds" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">constant chatter</a>
of the Red-eyed Vireo, the 
<a href="https://www.allaboutbirds.org/guide/Common_Loon/sounds" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">haunting lullabies</a>
of the Common Loon (the plumage is half the beauty of these birds—annoyingly, the video provided 
in the previous link shows them dressed in their drab winter plumage!), and, most impressively, the song of the 
<a href="https://www.allaboutbirds.org/guide/Wood_Thrush/sounds" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">Wood</a>
and
<a href="https://www.allaboutbirds.org/guide/Hermit_Thrush/sounds" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">Hermit Thrushes</a>.
</p>

<p>
People tend to forget that birdsong, while beautiful and pleasant sounding to us, are used by birds to delineate
territories. Birdsong falls under the broad definition of sexual selection. More specifically, birdsong is an example 
of <b>intersexual selection</b>. 
<a href="https://birds.fieldmuseum.org/stories/selection/sexual-selection" target="_blank"  rel="noopener noreferrer">The Field Museum</a>
defines intrasexual selection as adaptations that <q>serve to outcompete members of their 
own sex for access to mates.</q> <b>Intersexual selection</b>, on the other hand, are adaptations that 
<q>make an individual more attractive to potential mates.</q> The latter is perhaps the most familiar form of 
sexual selection; the peacock's tail feathers serve as a classical example. These ornaments are a double-edged sword,
showever, as they attract both mates and predators. This is just one example of how attractive ornaments 
can hinder the survivability of a bird. Other examples include being costly to produce, or making it 
difficult to evade predators (as might be the 
case if you carry a rump of over-sized tail feathers!). 
</p>


<p>
How does female preference and the fitness cost incurred by the males interact? We can study this question with a 
simple ordinary differential equation (ODE) model. Let's assume that male plumage and female plumage preference are each determined by independently
segregating alleles, so that the genotypes of our simulated birds are straightforward to work with. Let the letters
$A$ and $a$ denote bright and dull plumage, respectively, while $B$ and $b$ will denote attraction to these respective plumages.
So, females with genotype $AB$ will be attracted to males with genotypes $A*$, where the $*$ indicates that 
the preference allele does not matter in males. A system of ODEs adequately capturing these interactions is as follows:
</p>

<center>
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\dot{M_j} & = \frac{\lambda p_j}{2}\cdot \sum_j F_j \cdot \max\left(1-N/K, 0\right) - \mu\cdot \left(1+\phi^M_j\right),\\
\dot{F_j} & = \frac{\lambda p_j}{2}\cdot \sum_j F_j \cdot \max\left(1-N/K, 0\right) - \mu\cdot \left(1+\phi^F_j\right).\\
\end{aligned}
\label{birdModel}
\end{equation}
</center>

<p>
Here, $M_j$ and $F_j$ denote male and female birds of genotype $j$, respectively. Females produce clutches 
of size $\lambda$, $N$ is the total population size at any point in time, the carrying capacity is denoted $K$, 
and birds die at rate $\mu$. Any fitness cost imposed on males (or females) by their plumage is denoted as
$\phi^M_j$ ($\phi^F_j$). Note that the fitness cost modifies bird mortality. A fitness cost of $\phi^i_j = 0$ means
that birds with bright plumage have lifespans equal to the duller birds. For $\phi^i_j = 1$, birds of sex $i$ and
plumage $j$ will live half as long. The probability of being born with genotype $j$ is given by the parameter $p_j$. 
The probability of a bird with genotype $j$ are where things get interesting. Note that the model in \eqref{birdModel} does not explicitly account for mating preferences. 
Strength in preference merely refers to what probability a female bird will choose to mate with a more attractive
male bird over a less attractive one. The preference for male birds with $A$ plumage is 
denoted $\alpha_A$ and similarly for $a$ plumage males. The probability of a bird having genotype $AB$ is then
</p>

<center>
\begin{equation*}
\begin{aligned}
p_{AB} = \frac{1}{\left(\sum_j M_j\right)\left(\sum_j F_j\right)} \cdot\left[(1+\chi_A)\cdot\left(M_{AB}F_{AB} +
\frac{1}{2}M_{AB}F_{aB} + \frac{1}{2}M_{Ab}F_{AB} + \frac{1}{4}M_{Ab}{F_aB}\right) \\ 
+ (1+\chi_a)\cdot\left(\frac{1}{4}M_{aB}F_{Ab}\right) \\
+ (1-\alpha_A)\cdot\left(\frac{1}{2}M_{aB}F_{AB} + \frac{1}{4}M_{ab}F_{AB}\right) \\
+ (1-\alpha_a)\cdot\left(\frac{1}{2}M_{AB}F_{Ab} + \frac{1}{4}M_{AB}F_{ab}\right)\right]. 
\end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
</center>

<p>
I have used $\chi_a$ and $\chi_A$ to simplify notation a bit. Before we define these terms, note the usage of
$\alpha_a$ and $\alpha_A$. In the case of $\alpha_A$, this is the probability that a female will choose
to mate with a male with genotype $A*$ over a male with genotype $a*$. Therefore, all pairings of males and females
involving females with genotypes $*B$ and males with genotypes $a*$ will be modified by the expression $1-\alpha_A$.
These unfavorable pairings are supplanted by more favorable ones involving males with genotypes $A*$, hence why
these are modified by the expression $1+\chi_A$. Offspring with genotype $AB$ might also arise via the mating of
$Ab$ females and $aB$ males, so this pairing occurs more frequently depending on $\alpha_a$. These probabilities
must sum to one, it follows that
</p>

<center>
\begin{equation*}
\begin{aligned}
\chi_A & = \alpha_A \cdot \frac{M_{ab} + M_{aB}}{M_{AB} + M_{Ab}}, \\ 
\chi_a & = \alpha_a \cdot \frac{M_{Ab} + M_{AB}}{M_{aB} + M_{ab}}.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
</center>

<p>
That is, $\chi_A$ is just the preference strength multiplied by the ratio of unattractive males to attractive ones, 
and similarly for $\chi_a$. Now that we have a mathematical model to toy with, we can simulate the 
fate of a novel mutation in a population of birds! 
The simulation is initialized at capacity ($N = K$) with all birds having genotype $M_{ab}$, 
save for one mutant male with genotype $M_{AB}$. For this batch of simulations, we keep $\alpha_a = 0$ while
varying $\alpha_A\in[0,1]$ and $\phi^M_{A*} \in[0,1]$. For now, we assume that females do not incur any fitness
cost as a result of their plumage, so that $\phi^F_{A*} = \phi^F_{a*} = \phi^M_{a*} = 0$. (It is not uncommon for female birds to possess
a duller plumage than males, cardinals being one example.) 
</p>


<p>
The plots in Figure \ref{fig1} show the equilibrium frequency of the $A$ and $B$ alleles. 
</p>







-----------------

<p>
 Sexual selection was a controversial 
topic in the twentieth century and manifests most apparently
in the ornamentation of birds. Why does a peacock boast such exotic colors? These long vibrant feathers, while
beautiful, must not do much in the way of keeping away from predators! Consider also the ____; certainly
the bright feathers must contrast sharply with the foliage of its natural habitat? For those who have read my 
previous post, perhaps this is an example of mimicry, or at the least an advertisement to predators that
the bird is unpalatble, but neither of these is the case. So <i>why</i> have so many bird species evolved
such extravagant ornamentations?
</p>

<p>
There is no shortage of theories that have sought to explain this. Originally, it was believed that colorful
plumage was an indicator of vitality (the "honest advertisement" theory). Colorful plumage is energetically costly,
so that bright, vibrant colorations necessarily imply a potential mate must be healthy, vital, and parasite-free. 
This was the most popular theory for many years, but there was a problem. 
For many species of birds, the males do not rely on colorful plumage but mating dances or, even more exotically,
the construction of a nest or similar structure, to attract mates. One might consider these an extension of the 
conventional ornamentation we might associate with birds, but do not be fooled: they are no less complex and 
detailed. Take the ____ of the _____ for example, or the intricate dances of the _____. In the latter example,
males that are successful in mating must adhere to a strict sequence of dance... Such intricacy and attention to
detail makes one question whether this is in fact an expression of vitality and not deeper faculty on the part
of the female? 
</p>

<p>
Before returning to this point, there are other theories that sought to explain the beautiful feathers of our
backyard friends. Perhaps most interesting is the "hanidcap theory", which theorized that the deleterious 
colorings of males were selected for exactly <i>because they were deleterious</i>! What does this mean? 
Consider the peacock, the prototypical example in this long story: with its eccentric feathery dress, the 
peacock is saying "Look at how colorful I can afford to be and yet evade predation!" This can be thought
of as a re-interpretation of the honest advertisement theory discussed above. Thus, a bird with duller plumage
need not be unhealthy, but not exceptional either.
</p>

<p>
To an outsider (well, these were at least my thoughts when researching this topic), it was strange that all of 
these theories completely disregarded the preferences of the female! What if the females simply find the 
ornamental displays <i>attractive</i>? To some, it may seem a silly idea to talk about preferences in mate
selection for animals; what some may deem as fallaciously anthropomorphizing sex in birds. However, assuming
that a sexual ornament in males is a signal of vitality, or of the proper functioning of some underlying 
physiological process, is strong! Supported by plenty of evidence... 
</p>

<p>
One of the central arguments in ____'s book is that we cannot assume such eccentric coloring is always
a result of honest signaling. Rather, the null hypothesis is that an ornament has been selected for as a 
consequence of female choice. 
</p>

<p>
Finally, I decided last week enough was enough and completed the program. The simulation is of a haploid

</p> 

<center>
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\dot{x} & = \lambda_1 x\left(K_1 - x\right) - \alpha(x,y) xp,\\
\dot{y} & = \lambda_2 y\left(K_2 - y\right) - \alpha(x,y) yp,\\
\dot{p} & = \left[cp(y-x)\right]\alpha(x,y) - \mu p.
\end{aligned}
\label{LV}
\end{equation}
</center>

