---
title: 'Time-traveling epidemiology'
date: 2020-09-20
permalink: /posts/2020/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---


Suppose you’re an epidemiologist who recently came into possession of a time-machine. 
Following an outbreak of a mysterious disease in a small community of individuals, 
your job is to go back in time to do everything you can in order to curb the spread of 
the disease. The only information of the system you have is the (i) contact network of 
the community and (ii) the index case of the mysterious new disease. Your only allowed 
intervention is the quarantine of a single individual in the population. Of course, you 
could try to convince the people in the community that you are a time traveling epidemiologist, 
but they would very quickly dismiss you as a crackpot. Furthermore, you are not allowed to 
remove the index case, as clever as that may seem.

The contact network can be any of the three given in the slidebar to the left. The 
network can be random (G(n,p), or the Erdős–Rényi random graph), small-world, or a 
network generated with the Barabasi-Albert algorithm. Characteristics of the disease 
are also controlled via the slidebars on the left, including infection probability per 
contact and the recovery rate. Additional options depending on the particular 
network/algorithm you choose will appear when necessary. The graph is interactive so 
you’re able to zoom in and scroll to make node labels easier to read or to inspect 
potential candidates for removal. Selecting individuals in the network will highlight 
them and their immediate neighbors. After you pick an individual to remove from the 
population, simply click “Remove node” to remove them from the network. 
After you remove a node, click on “See results” to see how you did in preventing the 
spread of the disease! To determine this, some stochastic simulations on the network 
are ran in the background to see just how effective your choice was in reducing the 
total number of infected individuals. Simultaneously, the computer will calculate various 
centrality measures on the network and remove whichever node scores the highest for each 
measure to see how your choice compares. Be patient, as this step requires a bit of computation. 
Will your epidemiological intuition beat the centrality measures, or at the very least reduce the 
severity of the epidemic? Find out by accessing the Shiny app here.

<iframe src="https://cbutler112358.shinyapps.io/shiny_app/" style="border:none;width:759px;height:1150px;"></iframe>

A few finer details about the app: The simulation runs a few hundred stochastic simulations 
for each measure, as well as the choice of the user, so computation time may be a few seconds 
before the results show up, especially if the user selects a larger number of nodes. Note 
that the simulations are stochastic, so the percent changes may seem a little odd at first, 
especially if the network is small! For example, even if the computer and the user choose the 
same nodes to remove, the difference in results could be anywhere around $\pm5\%$. 
This problem can be mitigated by increasing the number of nodes, but at the cost of 
computation time (really only a few seconds). The percent change reported is the difference 
in the total number of infected nodes before and after that individual was removed from the 
network. A negative difference means that less people were infected after the change was made, 
while a positive difference indicates that more people ended up infected after a change was made.

The betweenness centrality used in the simulation is shortest path betweenness centrality. 
I wanted to include random walk betweenness centrality [2], which is probably much more useful 
as a centrality measure in this case, but there wasn’t a local function for this in igraph and 
I was in a hurry to get this app up and running! Perhaps an update later on will include this…

I could have embedded the Shiny app in this post and had everything neat and tidy 
in one place, but WordPress does not allow me to do this without upgrading to the 
Business plan, which is around $300 per year or so. Although I do love posting on 
this website (as rare as that may be), I do not care for it enough to be shelling out 
that amount of cash each year – especially as a Ph.D. student.

[1] Newman, M. Networks, Oxford University Press, 2018.
[2] Newman, M. A measure of betweenness centrality based on random walks, Social Networks, 27 (1) 2005, pp. 39-54.

